Coronavirus: Controls could cut Kiwi deaths from 60,000 to 10,000
Nikki Macdonald
11:25, Mar 22 2020
Facebook
Twitter
Reddit
Email
SharePlay Video
 
47s

‘We need everyone to start working differently’ - PM says

Jacinda Ardern says workplaces need to implement plans to work from home if possible.

Left unchecked, Covid-19 could kill up to 60,000 Kiwis, new modelling suggests.

But the numbers also show the power – and importance – of aggressive controls, which could slash deaths to about 10,000.

Auckland University physics professor Shaun Hendy is one of several New Zealand scientists mining data from infected countries to model what a Covid-19 outbreak would look like in New Zealand.

Modelling has shown aggressive controls such as quarantine, contact tracing and school closures could reduce Covid-19 deaths in NZ from 60,000 to 10,000.
KEVIN STENT/STUFF
Modelling has shown aggressive controls such as quarantine, contact tracing and school closures could reduce Covid-19 deaths in NZ from 60,000 to 10,000.
Initial models showed that – with no controls – cases would grow exponentially, 80-90 per cent of the population would catch it, and up to 60,000 Kiwis could die, Hendy said.

SharePlay Video
 
2m 40s

Dr Siouxsie Wiles answers all your questions about coronavirus

The effects of Covid-19 on asthmatics and pregnant women are among the questions Dr Wiles will answer.

READ MORE:
* Coronavirus: New ventilators at least six weeks away, manufacturers say
* The Detail: What happens to a family stuck together in quarantine?
* Coronavirus: what is contact tracing? And why is it so important?
* Coronavirus vs influenza: The differences between the two according to WHO

At the peak of infection, there would be about 10 times as many patients needing intensive care as there would be beds and staff to treat them.

Shaun Hendy is one of a group of scientists modelling the possible impact of a Covid-19 outbreak in New Zealand.
Shaun Hendy is one of a group of scientists modelling the possible impact of a Covid-19 outbreak in New Zealand.
New Zealand currently has 221 intensive care beds with ventilators. Hospitals could double those numbers by cutting non-urgent surgery and redirecting those resources. However, Hendy's worst case scenario would need more than 10 times as many as even the increased bed numbers.

ADVERTISEMENT


Advertise with Stuff
"There's a lot of uncertainty in these numbers," Hendy cautioned. "There's an element of luck and the decisions that government makes. But they do bring home the magnitude of the decisions that government is making at the moment. Not easy decisions and not easy numbers to look at."


Hendy said the key to reducing the number of deaths, and the strain on the health system, was to cut the number of people each Covid-19 patient infected. With no controls, one infected person would spread the disease to an average of 2.5 others. To halt or suppress the disease, you have to reduce that number below 1.

China has shown it's possible to stop the virus in its tracks with aggressive contact tracing, quarantine and containment - locking down the worst-affected province of Wuhan.

"If you scale that up enough, and you are fast enough, then it doesn't rip through the population... What we really need to do, if we are going to get through this, is we need to suppress it. That's ultimately going to mean that healthy people have to isolate themselves."

Key information: Sign up to get Stuff's daily coronavirus situation report email newsletter. It's a quick summary of the essential updates from New Zealand and around the world on Covid-19.

The tradeoff is that suppression measures, such as school closures, might need to stay in place for 12 to 18 months, until a vaccine is developed.

The modelling team is also investigating the potential impact of cutting transport between regions, if cases begin to spread in one community.

Experts disagree on how aggressive New Zealand's control measures should be before cases of local infection are confirmed.

Epidemiologist Michael Baker has consistently argued for tougher restrictions and more quickly, including school closures and public transport bans.
SUPPLIED
Epidemiologist Michael Baker has consistently argued for tougher restrictions and more quickly, including school closures and public transport bans.
Epidemiologist Michael Baker has called for school closures and public transport bans, while microbiologist Siouxsie Wiles said at this stage schools should only be closed to deal with known cases. 

Director-general of health Ashley Bloomfield said the Government is trying to think what will be needed in two weeks, and do it now. 