Coronavirus: $56 million package aimed at helping Māori unveiled
5 hours ago
Dan Satherley
Pause
Unmute
0:03
/
9:22
 
Fullscreen
Unmute
Peeni Henare on The Hui. Credits: The Hui

The Government has unveiled a $56 million package to help Māori through the coronavirus pandemic.
While only 52 people in New Zealand have been confirmed infected with the virus, there have been more than 303,000 cases worldwide and nearly 13,000 deaths. 

Related News
Watch: How to know if you're eligible for a COVID-19 test in New Zealand.
'No one can go into the hospitals': Kiwi in Italian coronavirus lockdown says victims die alone
Watch: The $12.1 billion plan includes, wage subsidies, sick leave support and tax relief.
'It is just the beginning': Government's $12 billion COVID-19 package unveiled
The Government last week announced a massive package to help fight the disease and support affected workers and industries.

"Our Government’s $12.1 billion economic package will help many Māori whānau, workers and businesses, whether it's through wage subsidies, income support and worker redeployment, or the $500 million fund to strengthen our fight against COVID-19, and ensure health services are there for those who need them the most,"  Associate Health and Whānau Ora Minister Peeni Henare said on Sunday.

 "But as Māori Ministers we know there are specific challenges for Māori that require a specific response."

In Sunday's announcement is:

$10 million reprioritised from Vote Māori Development for 'community outreach'
$30 million for Māori health services
$15 million for Whanau Ora
$1 million to provide Māori business with advice and planning
$470,000 for Te Arawhiti "to engage and work with iwi on their COVID-19 pandemic response plans" (Te Arawhiti is a Crown agency "dedicated to fostering strong, ongoing and effective relationships with Māori across Government).
"My Māori ministerial colleagues and I know we must act now to protect our people, particularly our kaumātua and those who already have significant health issues," Henare said.

"Times like these can be incredibly stressful so it's important that we make manaakitanga and kōtahitanga the centre of our response."

"Together, our Government and iwi can help whānau protect their loved ones from the impacts of COVID-19," Minister of Tourism and Māori Crown Relations Kelvin Davis said.