Officials are investigating the first possible community transmission of coronavirus in New Zealand, with the country sitting on alert-level 2 in a new four-tiered warning system.

Play VideoPrime Minister Jacinda Ardern has introduced an alert system as the country fights Covid-19.
It comes as many parts of the world move into lockdown - including the UK and large swathes of the United States - and the death toll of the pandemic reaches almost 12,000. There are now almost 300,000 who have been diagnosed with Covid-19 around the world - 90,000 of whom are considered already recovered.

Italy now has more than 53,000 confirmed cases and the world's highest death toll of 4825. It recorded its highest day-to-day jump on Saturday – 793 dead and 6557 cases.

ADVERTISEMENT

Advertise with NZME.
In New Zealand, alert-level 2 means Covid-19 is "contained but risk of community transmission growing" and human contact must be further reduced - over-70s have been told to stay at home and everyone needs to limit domestic travel.

A further 13 positive tests in New Zealand were confirmed on Saturday - the biggest jump in cases in a single day so far - and the country now has 52 cases in total.

Test results are awaited for two possible cases of community transmission – unrelated to overseas travel - in Auckland and Wairarapa.

"At this point, we cannot rule out a risk of community transmission in these cases," Director-General of Health Ashley Bloomfield said yesterday, announcing that the country's Covid-19 tally now sits at 52 confirmed cases.

Play VideoHow to stop the spread of coronavirus. Video / AP / CDC / Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust / ABC News
AP reports that streets, squares and highways are deserted in large parts of the world as curfews and lockdowns multiplied in the face of the rapidly advancing virus that is severely straining many health systems.

Three American states with a combined population of 70 million are moving to restrict residents to their homes to prevent the spread of the new coronavirus. California started on Friday and New York and Illinois were to follow this weekend. Connecticut and Oregon were preparing to do the same.

Related articles:
NEW ZEALAND
Coronavirus: Bar owner turning away anyone over 70
21 Mar, 2020 9:47pm
 4 minutes to read
NEW ZEALAND
First Covid-19 patient from Taupo named
21 Mar, 2020 6:22pm
 2 minutes to read
NEW ZEALAND
Visitor with Covid-19 shuts Te Puia
21 Mar, 2020 6:22pm
 2 minutes to read
NEW ZEALAND
New photos: Clinic rolls out drive-through coronavirus testing tents
21 Mar, 2020 7:48pm
 4 minutes to read
The United Kingdom - including London - is in lockdown and the death toll there has now reached 233, with 53 new deaths reported in the last 24 hours. NHS England said: "Patients were aged between 41 and 94 years old and all had underlying health conditions."

After Italy and China, Spain now has the third-highest number of infections worldwide. On Saturday it reported almost 5000 new cases in the past day, bringing the total to nearly 25,000. The death toll rose to 1326, up from 1002 Friday.

ADVERTISEMENT

Advertise with NZME.
Italy is struggling, with a median age of the overall population at 45.4 last year – greater than anywhere else in Europe. It is also seven years higher than the median age in China and slightly above that of South Korea.

Figures released on Friday showed the age of Italians dying of Covid-19 averaging out at 78.5. Almost 99 per cent of them were also suffering from at least one pre-existing condition or ailment.

Italy's mortality rate among those infected with the virus is thus a relatively high 8.6 per cent.

"Covid-19 fatalities are hitting older age groups hard," University of Oxford professor Jennifer Dowd noted on Twitter. "Countries with older populations will need to take more aggressive protective measures to stay below the threshold of critical cases that outstrip health system capacities."

READ MORE:
• Coronavirus: Health professionals and elderly first in queue for flu vaccine this year
• Coronavirus: UK tells elderly to self-isolate for four months
• Auckland Council giving extra care to elderly during Coronavirus outbreak
• Coronavirus: Pak'nSave Gisborne dedicates lane to elderly shoppers

Alert level three will be initiated in New Zealand if there's a heightened risk that the disease is not contained and could result in school closures, domestic travel restrictions, more public venue closures, and non face-to-face primary care consultations.

The past 24 hours have again seen the pandemic interrupt everyday life on a scale unprecedented in modern history.

All people aged over 70 – more than half a million people - or anyone with compromised immune systems, are now asked to stay at home. Non-essential domestic travel is discouraged.

"It's not about whether or not you're worried about yourself. It's that you should be worried for those around you, so please take it seriously," Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said in her first-ever address to the nation.

"This is about saving lives."

As the Prime Minister was talking, drive-through hubs set up for testing coronavirus were being set up around New Zealand, including at Shorecare Northcross on Auckland's North Shore.

On Saturday afternoon, people driving past could see tents set up outside the medical centre with drive-through only access and what appeared to be increased security.

Visitors were being asked not to leave their cars on arrival and to follow directions for traffic management.

"Our staff will take you through a checklist and if you do fit the criteria, we will register your details and make a time for you to come to an isolated section of our Northcross clinic for testing," the centre said on the website.